.. _chap:report:

Text Reports and Output Listing
===============================

.. rubric:: Reporting facilities

The AIMMS system has several reporting features to present model results
to you or an end-user.

-  The *graphical (end-)user interface* lets you not only view your
   model results, but also change input values and run the model
   interactively. In general, the graphical user interface is the most
   convenient and direct way to verify model results and view the effect
   of input changes.

-  A *print page* allows you to obtain a hard-copy of your graphical
   model results. It is created in the graphical user interface of AIMMS
   and can contain the same objects as pages in the end-user interface.
   Single print pages or reports composed of multiple print pages can be
   printed either from within the end-user interface or from within the
   model. Printing pages and the available functions that you can use in
   your model to initiate printing is discussed in the AIMMS User's
   Guide.

-  An *text report* lets you save your model results in files. It is
   created as part of your model using ``PUT`` and ``DISPLAY``
   statements. The result can be written to either a file or to a text
   window in the graphical user interface. Text reports are convenient,
   for instance, when you need to generate a special format input file
   for an external program.

-  The *listing file* lets you view the contents of all constraints and
   variables of a particular mathematical program in your model just
   before or after solving it. The listing file is a convenient medium
   for debugging the precise contents of the constraints in a
   mathematical program generated on the basis of your model and data.

.. rubric:: This chapter

This chapter concentrates on the last two reporting media. It explains
how to create and print text reports. More specifically, it discusses
the ``File`` declaration, as well as the ``PUT`` and ``DISPLAY``
statements. It also explains how you can optionally create a text report
consisting of pages each built up of a header, footer and data area. The
remaining part of the chapter will explain the format of the constraint
and solution listings generated by AIMMS.

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 1

   the-file-declaration
   the-put-statement
   the-display-statement
   structuring-a-page-in-page-mode
   the-standard-output-listing