The authors
===========

.. rubric:: Marcel Roelofs

Marcel Roelofs received his Ph.D. in Applied Mathematics from the
Technical University of Twente in 1993 on the application of Computer
Algebra in Mathematical Physics. From 1993 to 1995 he worked as a
post-doc at the Centre for Mathematics and Computer Science (CWI) in
Amsterdam in the area of Computer Algebra, and had a part-time position
at the Research Institute for the Application of Computer Algebra. In
1995 he accepted his current position as CTO of AIMMS B.V. His main
responsibilities are the design and documentation of the AIMMS language
and user interface.

.. rubric:: Johannes Bisschop

Johannes Bisschop received his Ph.D. in Mathematical Sciences from the
Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore USA in 1974. From 1975 to 1980 he
worked as a Researcher in the Development Research Center of the World
Bank in Washington DC, USA. In 1980 he returned to The Netherlands and
accepted a position as a Research Mathematician at Shell Research in
Amsterdam. After some years he also accepted a second part-time position
as a full professor in the Applied Mathematics Department at the
Technical University of Twente. From 1989 to 2003 he combined his
part-time position at the University with managing Paragon Decision
Technology B.V. and the continuing development of AIMMS. From 2003 to
2005 he held the position of president of Paragon Decision Technology
B.V. His main interests are in the areas of computational optimization
and modeling.

.. rubric:: Other contributors to AIMMS

In addition to the main authors, various current and former employees of
AIMMS B.V. (formerly known as Paragon Decision Technology B.V.) and
external consultants have made a contribution to the AIMMS
documentation. They are (in alphabetical order):

-  Pim Beers

-  John Boers

-  Peter Bonsma

-  Mischa Bronstring

-  Ximena Cerda Salzmann

-  Michelle Chamalaun

-  Horia Constantin

-  Guido Diepen

-  Robert Entriken

-  Floor Goddijn

-  Thorsten Gragert

-  Koos Heerink

-  Nico van den Hijligenberg

-  Marcel Hunting

-  Roel Janssen

-  Gertjan Kloosterman

-  Joris Koster

-  Chris Kuip

-  Gertjan de Lange

-  Ovidiu Listes

-  Peter Nieuwesteeg

-  Franco Peschiera

-  Bianca Rosegaar

-  Diego Serrano

-  Giles Stacey

-  Richard Stegeman

-  Selvy Suwanto

-  Jacques de Swart

-  Martine Uyterlinde